## Aina Tur: galaxy of feelings


I always feel reassured to be reminded that, in spite of the visual
image's imperialism, which oppresses and smothers us, there is a trend
within contemporary theatre -- and not a minor one -- which insists on
safeguarding, exploring and broadening the power of the dramatic word. A
word that, without relinquishing the literary role that has always been
assigned to the textual score of *great Western theatre* from its
beginnings (from Aeschylus to Koltès, from Shakespeare to
Valle-Inclán...), has also nourished itself from the vibrations and
rhythms of the spoken word, and that jesters, narrators and
storytellers, ever in the surrounding margins of theatricality, have
inoculated it as an antidote against the often grandiose and sublime
rhetoric of no few authors.

Together with many other intermixtures, the dramaturgical structure in
works of our own tradition in theatre has too unfolded in a fertile
symbiosis with narrative genres, and not just due to the Aristotelian
dictate according to which "plot is the first principle and soul of the
tragedy" (not to talk about the *Anti-Aristotelian* Bertolt Brecht who,
in his "Short Organum", claims to agree with him), but because surveying
said tradition should be enough to ascertain to what extent theatre has
built its stories or fables out of myths, legends, wonders, historical
chronicles, feats -- real or fictive -- passed on by tradition, more or
less gruesome or unheard-of cases, happening in nearby or faraway
places, and a long so on.

So, even though some strands of Western dramaturgy display a higher or
lower weakening of the structuring function of plot; even though that,
in the transition between the 19th to the 20th century, it is impossible
to deny that *narrativity* is not always the skeleton of *dramatic
action* (Materlinck, Chekhov, Strindberg, the avant-gardes, Beckett,
Pinter, etc); even though, more recently, so-called postdramatic theatre
has also vindicated other devices through which the characters (or the
*actants*) fates may unfold in the text and/or the performance, it is
undeniable that the narrative function of dramatic text shows no sign of
abating.

Proof of it is that robust and diverse trend in contemporary dramatic
writing which some have started to call *narraturgy*... precisely
because of its inextricable fusion and tension between narrative and
dramaturgy, of which this luminous "galaxy of fireflies" offered to us
by Aina Tur is a stunning example. It also contours another fruitful
trend in theatre writing -- and elsewhere -- more recently named
*autofiction*; its definition and genealogy may prove, and has been
worth more than one essay, but suffice it to underline here that it
represents a vehement irruption of the author's narrative voice, the
naked truth and in the first person, which is conveyed to the audience
as an autobiographical account.

As we well know, autobiography is very often inscribed in narrative
genres, in some essays and, obviously, in poetry; and without doubt it's
also inscribed -- mostly, however, in a veiled way -- in no few dramatic
works. What is distinctive about so-called *autofiction* is the
impudence (the word is not to be understood in a negative sense)
demonstrated by the author, most notably -- as in this case the female
author -- giving up in front of us the trappings of narcissism and
displaying their own weaknesses, their physical miseries, their moral
disturbance, their fear, their helplessness, in fact, in the face of a
situation which brings down their ability to react.

But this *authorial courage* is not the only transfixing thing about
Aina Tur's play. The dramaturgy and scenic design are also brave: a
woman sitting before us, unable to move because of *that* fear, who
speaks, speaks, and speaks to us, alternating the story of her
terrifying Central American adventure with her long silences... which
make us think, which commands us to think (among many other things, for
instance: *what would I have done in her situation?*). And, from the
perspective of the "theatrical spectacle", there's nothing else to it: a
woman telling us a "story based on real events", barely moving, with her
"arse stuck to the chair" -- literal words -- and some -- imaginary --
mangoes which now and then fall off the tree -- likewise --, she peels
them with a knife -- likewise -- and thus she immerses herself in the
smell, the taste and the sticky juice of her "tropical" adventure...

And even so, in spite of such spectacular sparseness, which often evoke
-- and we're thankful for that -- the minimalist device of the late
plays by Beckett, the narrative discourse fascinates, almost mesmerises
us, not just because of her skill in dosifying the vicissitudes of her
terrible experience -- the more than likely bloodshed *the thing* can
end up leading to --, but because of the "galaxy of feelings" the
author's voice unravels in her remembrance: smells, tastes, colours,
sounds, the tropical heat, the mosquito stings, her bare foot sinking or
slipping in the mud, the cold feeling of a gun's barrel against her
temple, the light... and many other of the body's voices, like when a
woman, while being body-searched, gets repeatedly groped on the butt or,
like the stiffness of a body when one is ordered not to move, while five
guns are pointing at you.

But also the range of feelings the Central American tropic provides you
with, in such way that words, from the still woman's voice, flutter
about the scene as if weaving a tapestry that fear is not able to undo,
or even better, like an impressionist painting -- even a *pointillist*
one -- which serves as both background and figure of the story. A story
that also intertwines time and space, and -- as we slowly find out --
the character's different *selves*, who even recounts an episode of
*synchronicity* ("the coincidence in time and in space of two
non-causally related episodes, but united in their meaning"; *vid*. Jung
and Pauli, among others), where we briefly get a glimpse of the field of
quantum physics...

Lastly -- without revealing anything substantial about the adventure,
the *fabula* narrated -- the only thing I have left to emphasise is that
Aina Tur's text faces us with an ethical dilemma which can't but disturb
us. The "five dead" the author and protagonist still carries on her back
"twenty years later", along with their more than probable "five
mothers", will they continue to flicker in our consciousness as readers
and/or spectators, like the five persistent fireflies on the stage...
even after the dark ending?

*José Sanchis Sinisterra*
