## A galaxy of fireflies

>_To the others_



Daylight. Morning in the tropic.

I've spent years sitting on this chair. Stuck. And I'm incapable of
moving. At first... At first, I thought it might be some...

Did you hear that?

That sound?

No?

Another mango has fallen down.

They usually fall down every day.

Ripe. Delicious.

Plop.

That sound. Plop. As it lands on the ground. It calls me. But I can't
reach for it. I've told you already. I can't lift my ass off this chair.
The mangoes keep falling down, and I'm not able to eat them.

At first, when I got stuck, sitting here, on hearing that plop, I'd try
to get up with my full strength.

Every effort was in vain.

One day, more or less a decade ago, on a scorching day, I heard the
impact. Sweet.

Plop.

And I didn't bat an eyelid.

I was really sweating and I didn't feel like wasting energy on something
that was beyond my reach.

I guess I accepted my condition: sitting here, forever.

I closed my eyes.

And I took a breath.

Would you close your eyes too?

Yes?

No?

Well, I... this *self* sitting here suggests you close your eyes with
me.

I'm getting up. Painlessly. I'm walking towards the front of the yard,
where the trees are. The lemons look firm, voluptuous. They glisten. As
if they had been coated with wax. The guavas are starting to bloom.

I spend my time taking walks. Looking at leaves, fruits and flowers.

The wind caresses me.

*Silence.*

Here it is. The mango.

It didn't burst open when it hit the ground. It must have dropped off
the lower branches. I touch it. That thick skin. Almost impenetrable. So
many days, so many years, so many *plop*... And now I have it in my
hands.

I smell it.

I think about biting it. I do it. But I find it slightly disgusting.

I stop.

What then?

How should I eat it?

Tear away the skin with my teeth?

Desist?

Out of the blue, a knife appears on the floor.

(That's the beautiful thing about imagination, it gifts you everything
you need)

I start to peel it.

My hands, full of juice. The sickly sweet smell soaking me up, down to
my toenails. Tearing the skin unhurriedly at first. Then, in haste. The
fibres between my teeth. The juice in my mouth, on my neck, on my
cleavage. Hands sticky. The ecstasy.

I opened my eyes after a while. And I was still here, like this, just
like you see me now. Sitting. Fuck... the way words help us. What would
I do without words? Sometimes I think I'm just made of words. One day
these, the next those. Some day, all of them at once.

Words...

I'm digressing. Sorry. That's not the story I want to tell you. I spend
so many hours here, on my own, years sometimes, so when there's somebody
I can talk to, I feel the urge to tell everything...

Okay, I'm going to focus.

You'd like to know while I'm sitting here, wouldn't you?

Well... I actually don't know why I'm asking that.

I'll get to the point.

This situation. Mine. Being here and not being able to leave, is just a
consequence. This, my ass stuck to the chair, is the outcome of
something which began on July 24th, 1998, in this tiny tropical country
I won't be able to name.

Yes, this story is based on real events, and due to security reasons, I
will have to leave some people's names out, as well as some of the
locations where what happened, happened.

Anyway...

July 24th, 1998.

I got up from bed effortlessly. I find it difficult to get up early.
Very much so. But on that day, I left the bed early, and was quite
happy. Maybe it's a bit of an overstatement to call that slim, small
mattress dumped on the concrete floor a bed. But that was my bed, and
for a long time. Shorter than planned, but longer than I could have
guessed at some point.

My bed, my bedroom, were right next to the eucalyptus distiller. It
smelled super good. Uncomfortable as it was, the room smelled super
good. We'd get imbued with that scent on days we used the still. So
nice.

I had been working for an NGO in a project to... *Ais*, I'm such a bore.
I'm digressing again... Let's try to focus a little bit. I'm so
delighted to have you here and then I get started... started with my
verboseness, this urge to tell you everything. In detail. Excuse me.

You should visit me more often...

Where was I?

Oh yeah, the reason I set off so quickly, that's it!

I was thrilled. I hadn't been to the sea for a month and... Án....
hmmm... Shall we call Him... He... Thinking about Him gets me smiling
every time. Because when we were introduced to each other, we instantly
understood that some day... Sorry, back to the point: He asked me to go
with Him to work.

He told me we'd go buy coconuts. Yes, coconuts. He was devising a flood
prevention plan and I believe one of the actions revolved around
replanting the coconut tree region in order to... What for, I don't
really know, in fact. But the thought of hauling those round, brown,
little furry balls from place to place with our pickup truck seemed
fantastic to me, especially since the morning would conclude with a
visit to the beach.

I asked Him if Oriol, my friend, could come along. Oriol and I had been
sharing a flat in Barcelona as well as that stay, project and adventures
in this country. He agreed, even if just to have me by his side, so the
both of us went, Oriol and I.

Oriol and I had just recovered from salmonella poisoning. And that damn
diarrhoea. And vomiting. And the dizziness. The nightmare of shitting
ourselves down in the middle of the street was gone too. Who was
shitting himself was Oriol, poor him. What a story. An ice-cream wasn't
easy to find in that rural region. But we managed to. A Twister. Two. So
delicious. And in such a bad condition, damn.

The morning that followed we were barely human. We were out in the
sticks, there was no public transport or a phone. The only option was to
make our way out the nearest road, intercepting the first four-wheeled
thing that came up and ask to be taken to the capital to be seen by a
doctor.

We saw that a big red truck, empty, was drawing near, raising dust. We
paid the driver. He told us he was going into town and that he was in a
hurry. We rode in the tonneau, the coverless area where cargo is loaded.
Burnt to a cinder while swallowing tons of dust, we travelled down those
roads for a couple of hours. Unpaved roads with no traffic signs or lane
markings. So in the end, the fever and the stomach cramps were just
afterthoughts.

We reached the office of the NGO. It was closed. It was lunchtime. There
was no other way: we had to wait outside. Outdoors. Oriol, or rather
whatever remained of him, those two metres of sinewy body lying on the
pavement, with his head resting on my lap, gushing shit endlessly,
unable to get up. I was able to stay on my feet and I went to the tree
to poop. In broad daylight. We had no paper. But we would poop anyway.
People passed by and walked away from us. We smelled of shit. We looked
like junkies.

Fortunately, that nightmare was over. And I'm digressing again. *Ais.*
In part, I'm telling you so you can understand... I don't know. I don't
know what you are supposed to gather from that pooing story. It just
happened. And we got over it. We were back in the country, distilling
essential oils and classifying plants. And one day by the seaside was a
good way to celebrate that everything was still going well.

He had told me that after we were done with work we'd go to the Bay of
Ji... oops, I almost let it out, a place name. So, anyway, we were going
to the sea. And to eat. He also mentioned there was an island in the
bay...

Can you get there by boat?

He laughed and looked at me. Like almost every time I said something to
Him. No, we can't go there. There are pirates down there. Wow, that's
cool! Pirates!

No, it's not cool. Those are actual pirates. They rob and kill.

Fuck!

The actual existence of pirates in real action shocked me more than the
possibility of... never mind... I had been here for more than one month.
I got used to hearing gunshots. To the sight of coffins. Being warned
about certain places I shouldn't go to. Used to even understanding death
and violence from a different perspective. That "fuck", then, didn't
mean the same as my other "fucks". It was a different "fuck". An ethical
and moral variation on earlier "fucks". A new "fuck" which was shaping
up, without me realising quite yet\... I don't know\... what it meant.

We'll go to a safe place, rest assured. But no, we won't go sailing.

He... *Ay...* With his words, his smile... And that look which made my
guts churn. I couldn't bring myself to accept it, but he made me feel
good.

Pirates! I kept thinking as I got in the car.

Will I see them, from a distance?

I would like so much to be a pirate!

Putting out to sea. On sail. Storming ships packed with cargo. Robbing
them. Not killing anyone. (Just bruising them a bit). And sailing away
towards that island of our dreams. Finding the treasure chest. We'd
celebrate it. And after some rest, my crew and I, loaded with gold, we'd
continue sailing the seas. Discovering uninhabited, remote... virginal
paradises. Wonderful.

That's what I thought.

The morning looked promising.

And my imagination was taking flight.

It was seven of us, and we had a mission: transporting coconuts from one
place to the next and outwitting the pirates off the shore.

What a plan! Perfect. The perfect plan. Everything was perfect.

They allowed me to ride in the back of the pick-up, standing. With Oriol
and with... with... with Álvaro. Álvaro wasn't his name, but it suits
him. Álvaro was, is, His brother. He had arrived the day before and he
was just freaking out. The backdrop was really different from his home
town of Madrid. He was right in the midst of a sensory jungle. Mud
tracks. Potholes. Brakes slammed. People jaywalking. Countless peasant
hats waggling among the bushes. Surrounded by cars. Surrounded by more
peasant hats. Dark faces. Eyes filled with gifted life. Souls who had
dodged death.

*Silence.*

I remember the dampness of that morning.

We succeeded in our goal: coconuts loaded, unloaded, and delivered.

Off to the Bay!

Once again on the back of the pick-up. Clutching the railing so we
wouldn't fall. We couldn't stop crying out.

Heeeey!

Ahhh!

Look at that!

That rocks!

Leaps. Squealing brakes. Wheels slipping on the mud, which made us jerk
from side to side. We were happy, all three at the back: Álvaro, Oriol,
and myself. I guess those who were inside the car must have been talking
about work. And I guess, too, considering what was the best way to get
there.

We were driving away from the settlements. From clumps of houses, their
adobe walls, their old timber, their ceilings, sometimes built from
coffin scraps. The details...

We hadn't seen a single person for a while.The mud seemed fresher, with
no trace of other cars.

A proper adventure!

Sheer bliss!

What a sense of freedom!

Shouting. Happy. Discovering the world.

Then, all of a sudden...

Stop!!!!!!!!!

Get out of the car!!!!!!!

Those voices sounded far away, although in fact the five hooded men,
bandanas covering their faces, jumping and running towards us like
savages, wielding their guns, were inching closer.

I wasn't thinking.

It's now I'm thinking.

There, I just did what I was told to do.

Get out of the car. Hands behind your neck. Take your shoes off.

They left mine on. I was the only woman.

Get moving!

We were at gunpoint and they were yelling at us. We kept following
orders.

One of them took Pedro, the driver, whose name was not Pedro, with him.
With the car.

The rest walked in line. The guys, barefoot, not me. With our hands
behind our necks. And with four hooded men guiding us, in shouts, away
from the road.

I was still not thinking.

I don't think anyone was thinking.

Well, those who had been born in this small country were surely
thinking.

I can't remember what I was feeling, either. Nothing, I believe.

I have asked myself sometimes if I cried and, honestly enough, I don't
think I did, at that point.

We delved deep into the forest.

Another question I often ask myself is: was I afraid?

I don't think so, not at that stage.

I wasn't thinking.

I wasn't feeling.

I was just following orders.

It's been more than twenty years, and I remember everything. It's like
having a photograph tattooed into my brain.

I remember the light perfectly.

The colour of the mud.

The tree trunks.

The colours they wore. And the colours we wore.

I remember the place where we stood still.

There was a small esplanade. A very small one.

And they held us there, motionless. With our hands behind our necks.

We were searched, one after another.

I was searched three times. And each time they touched my butt.

The third time they required my shoes.

I had been taken away from my group. Slightly. And there was a gun
pointing to my head.

When I crouched down to take my shoes off the gun replicated the
movement of my body, downwards. Down to my feet. That's when I cried. I
can remember that suppressed crying. Also the tremor of that hand which
held the cold pistol.

Its barrel was touching my skin.

And I also remember my hands moving erratically. I was trembling. But I
was trying to make the firmest, the most precise movements of my life.

The assailant had... I think he had... a moment of compassion when she
saw the tears flooding my cheeks. And my neck. And my cleavage. And I
wasn't even sobbing.

Don't worry, nothing will happen to you, he said to me.

What's going on is a whole lot already, man. I thought, while his shaky
hand pressed his gun against my temple.

The crying receded.

I guess it did me good to think that...

Did you hear that?

That noise?

No?

Another mango has fallen down.

I'm going to close my eyes. I do it every time one falls off.

I invite you to do the same.

This time I'll go a bit quicker.

*Silence.*

Here it is.

I touch it.

That strong skin. Almost impenetrable.

I smell it.

A knife.

Juice. A sickly sweet smell. Ecstasy.

*Silence.*

Where were we?

Ah... that "nothing will happen to you".

The crying receded.

We had just made a pact: unless something went awry, unless some bird
passed and startled him, probably no bullet would come out of that gun
for me that time. And that was a consolation. The only consolation I
could cling to.

They took me back to my group.

What they did to me was also done to some others. I can't remember which
ones. I don't keep images from that. I was recovering from the cold by
my left temple. That trembling. That finger in the trigger that held my
life captive.

I stopped belonging to myself.

My life between a finger and a trigger.

Such little leeway.

I considered for a long while the young assailant's trembling finger, he
who had felt some conpassion to me, and had paid me a few words of
consolation.

I saw myself from above. As though I had been watching a movie of what
had happened some minutes before. With the camel-coloured shorts I
borrowed from Oriol and that black ribbed sleeveless t-shirt that I kept
for years. Full of dust. And my hair, all messy. Small. Kneeling down.
Taking my shoes off. With the gun rubbing my left temporal lobe.

I see those hooded guys. Taking us aside, one by one, fumbling in our
pockets.

I see Him, and Álvaro, Oriol and the other two, whose names I can't
remember today, but whose faces, bodies and eyes I do remember. Even
their t-shirts.

*Silence.*

The searching was over.

We were standing in a row, all six of us, once again.

One next to the other.

With our hands behind of our necks.

The assailants were pointing at us from a distance. Two guns. Two
assault rifles: an Ak47 and an m16. Spoils from a war that had never
been settled. Rival weapons and a single purpose: to rob and maybe kill
us.

We heard the sound of a car.

Maybe that was the end of the the assault. Or of our lives. Any change.
Any movement. Any noise. Could be an end.

And, yes, I was starting to think. I think we were all thinking. At that
time, we were.

The noise felt increasingly close. And the mystery was unbearable.

I hope it's the police.

And what if I'm caught in the crossfire, what would I do then?

It better be not the police.

Pedro maybe?

I hope that's Pedro.

And what if the person in the car is the other assailant, without Pedro?

I hope that's not our car.

I don't want to see a dead person.

The car eventually arrived, with Pedro behind the wheel.

They took him out of the car and pushed him towards us. Another one, one
of ours. Standing, next to us, with his hands behind his neck.

Maybe that would be the end of the assault.

Maybe it would be the end of our lives.

Why were we being retained if they already had all of our belongings?

Why were they back with Pedro and the car and we we weren't allowed to
go?

Turn around!, shouted one of them.

And turning back, my whole life burst out in my head.

Just like that.

So it goes.

I was bracing myself for the gunshot. Gunshots.

But there was silence instead.

Silence.

Then they talked between them. I was shaking, really trembling inside.
And I shed many tears. Silently. I was the only woman. I had been told
too many stories about rape and murder. That's why when I heard them
talk from a distance, I became frightened... I didn't know if they were
talking about letting us go or who would be the first one to rape me. I
only wished that, if I was raped, they'd let me go. That they wouldn't
kill me. That I wouldn't be taken hostage. That I wouldn't be tortured
for days. That it would be quick. That it wouldn't be too painful. I
prayed. To God. Yes, I know he doesn't exist. But I did pray. I asked
him this: a quick rape, not too painful, no blood, no torture, no
kidnapping.

They all began to fear for me.

One after another, they were whispering to me. Barely moving their lips.

Don't worry, nothing will happen to you.

We're here.

We will protect you.

That frightened me even more. So afraid I began to focus on the
mosquitos feasting on my legs. I relished every single bite. That
subdued the reflex to get rid of them. I had been doing that without
noticing. At that point, I realised. A swift movement to repel those
mosquitoes could have been the end. My end.

Three guns and two assault rifles pointing at me. From behind.

My life lay between those fingers and those triggers.

I couldn't afford myself the slightest slip. I had to stay still. With
my hands behind my neck. With my feet drowning in the mud. And those
mosquitoes devouring me.

It took two years before the mosquito sting marks went away.

Two years, or longer. With those hours engraved on my skin. Every time I
took a look at my legs, every time I applied sunscreen on my skin, every
time I put clothes on or off: there they were.

They stopped talking between them.

We feared for the worst.

I started to think about my parents.

Like never before.

I apologised for having embarked on that blasted adventure with no way
back.

I sent them my full forces so they could get over their daughter's
death.

And I prayed to my grandfather.

He had died only a few months before. I dreamed about him. It was a
recurring dream. He'd come by my bed, wake me tenderly and say: "I've
come to hug you".

I asked him to help me. To hug me at that end. To come with me, please.
And I felt at peace.

*Silence.*

Something happened. They were louder. Movement. Much. Too much.

Silence.

We heard footsteps and voices every time further away.

Once again, the situation was taking a turn. Once again the uncertainty
on our minds. Any change entailed an additional dose of fear. One
further step towards the unwanted.

One of ours whispered.

It's only three of them. I'm going to attack. Don't worry. This is
nearly over.

Don't you move, motherfucker. My first words since we had stepped out of
the car.

I was compelling enough to stop him from moving a single inch from where
we stood. Also, at the same time, when I gave him a sidelong glance, I
realised that wasn't keeping his hands behind of his neck.

Later on, when that was already over, I knew he had belonged to the
elite forces of this tiny country's guerilla.

Later on, I was also to learn that he could have beaten them all. But a
different fear got hold of me at the time.

Don't let this guy charge.

Please.

What should I do if he moves?

Run and hide behind a tree?

Run to the right? Or to the left instead?

Drop to the floor and crawl away?

Climb that tree, no matter how?

I had no answers. And since I saw that, for the time being, he wouldn't
make a move, I tried to pay attention elsewhere. I went evasive. On the
intentions of who wanted to save us. And the rifles and guns aimed at
us.

I started making calculations to keep my mind off.

We had been picked up around 8 o'clock in the morning. Counting the
loading and the unloading of the coconuts, one or two hours must have
passed. We must have stayed there another couple of hours, although I
wasn't very sure. So I reckoned it must have been somewhere between 10
and 12 am. I added 7 hours to that. And I calculated that, at the
moment, it must have been between 5 and 7 in the evening in Menorca.

I thought about what day it was, what day number. Since I had arrived I
had kept a diary, that's why I didn't doubt: July 24. Fiestas of Es
Castell. I thought. I bet my friends are partying until they drop,
surrounded by horses and people drenched in sweat. They must be drinking
pomada. At this time I bet they're bursting into tipsy laughter. They
must be talking shit all over the place. And look at where I am instead.

They had paella today. Like every year. That delicious paella we order
every year, somewhere. I just so want to eat paella, I thought. Two
dishes. With lots of beer and lots of pomada as the dessert. That pomada
Nati used to prepare with natural lemon and fresh mint, and a lot of Gin
Xoriguer. I was craving litres of that.

Me, who had just been on a trip on my own for the first time. Who had
flown across the ocean for the first time. Who, as my diary reads,
wanted to feel free at the fullest. Broaden my points of view. See the
world. Meet new people. Live differently. Me, who had given up on my
true love so I could fulfil my reckless explorer's dreams. Me, who had
decided, for the first time, not to stay in summer on my island. Me, who
was getting bored of doing the same thing all the time. At that moment,
at 21 years old, I was longing for a monotonous life, around the usual
folks, keeping myself busy with my customary routines. With the same old
flavours, No more changes whatsoever, please. And I cursed myself for my
ambition. I cursed myself for not conforming.

And that's how I managed to keep myself busy. With the odd scare here
and there. As when something stirred. When a bird flew past. When one of
ours moved a few millimetres. When, while I couldn't see them, I felt
one of the others changed position.

Mosquitoes were keeping me busy too. They were feasting on my legs.

My feet were sinking deeper in the mud.

Rain started to pour, a little bit.

It was the wet season. Of heavy, abundant rain. But then it merely
drizzled. And we were lucky for that.

Later on, we were told that the place we had been taken to was some kind
of mass grave, filled with corpses. Dead people. Worthless. Murdered
people. People who didn't even deserve a resting place.

When I was told that, I couldn't stop thanking whoever it was for the
rain, the gentle rain. I dare not to imagine what would happen if,
suddenly, propelled by one of those tropical downpours, from inside the
mud, that mud that was gobbling my feet, remains started to emerge.
Human remains. Rotting corpses.

Are you able to imagine that?

I am. And I'm sure I would have screamed, I would have moved and caused
an ugly mess.

Well, that's for sure.

We were left standing there for long, our situation unchanging.

I got used to fear.

To fear that everlasting moment.

Everything was like a single moment.

Until we heard voices coming in our direction.

Once again, the panicking.

Once again, the same doubts.

I hope it's the police.

I hope it's not the police.

I hope they move on and they leave us here.

I hope they don't kill me.

I hope they don't retain me.

I hope they don't rape me.

I hope that, when they rape me, they do it fast.

I hope they don't kill me.

I hope they don't kill Oriol.

I hope they don't kill Him.

I hope they don't kill Álvaro.

I hope they don't kill Pedro.

I hope they don't kill Mau... the... former guerilla fighter.

I hope they don't kill the... guy in the blue t-shirt.

I hope they follow this reversed order when they kill us.

I hope I'm capable of returning on my own, somewhere, if I'm the only
one not getting killed.

*I-hopes* that crossed my mind in less than one second.

Turn away!

And in turning back, once again... everything I had lived, diluting, in
an instant, before me.

This time, besides seeing my life go past, I also thought.

What a bunch of sadists!

They want to see our faces when they shoot us.

I hated them. For the first time, I think.

The world had come to a halt.

Each facing the others.

An emptiness.

Huge.

Two assault rifles. An AK47, Russian. An M16, North American. And three
handguns I couldn't identify.

Five men... who weren't men. They were kids. Their bodies were not
adult, you could tell. Five children, dressed in worn-out black clothes.
Flea-black, as my mum would say. With bandanas covering their faces.
With hoods and hats to conceal their hair. One of them was wearing a
wig. Like a clown's. Canary yellow. I guess he didn't have a hat...

Them, the others. Five kids pointing at us, challenging us. In silence.
Face to face. With our lives between their fingers and their triggers. I
keep repeating that over and over, but the feeling was terrible. My life
didn't belong to me, it wasn't mine. My life was in the space between
those fingers and those triggers.

On the other side, us. Seven. Six with our hands behind our neck. One
with arms resting by his upper body. Expectant, the seven of us.
Fearless now. It was the end. We could only wish that they didn't hurt
us too much, but I don't think that even crossed our minds.

In my brain, silence.

Breathing emptiness.

*Silence.*

Get out! All of you, back on the car! One by one!

To the car, somebody said, one of ours.

I can't remember who that was. I can't remember his voice. To the cry
"get out" nobody had moved out. And one of us said my name. I reacted
and started to walk. I walked next to the others. With my head bent
down. Trying to be invisible.

You and you.

Wait.

I stopped for a second, unsure if they were talking to me.

I looked on.

I saw they had been captured, Oriol and He.

They were still being held at gunpoint.

I feared for the worst.

*La chemi.*

What? I don't understand.

(Oriol didn't understand that.)

*La chemi*, one more time. He sounded more violent.

Your t-shirt, someone translated.

I sensed Pedro, the driver, behind me. He made me walk forward. It was
his turn to save me. I understood the deal. If anything went wrong, the
two of us would escape in the car.

I walked forward.

In a knee-jerk reaction, I went to the back of the pickup, the coverless
part. My place since we had left in the morning.

Inside. Inside. Quick. Pedro shouted, breathlessly.

I understood immediately, so I did what he said.

I got into the car.

I closed the door.

Fuck

Pedro also came in and closed the door.

Fuck.

He placed the key into the ignition.

Fuck

He started the engine.

I kept watching from the back seat, squatting.

One after the other, they were getting in the car.

Another saved life.

Oriol and He were still being held at gunpoint.

Don't worry, Pedro said.

He had become my guardian. my Saviour. But I... I was suffering for my
friend and for Him. Maybe they were getting killed and there was nothing
I could do. Just flee.

*Silence.*

The time came, at last. They had been allowed to leave.

Are we all in the car?

Yes.

We crank up the engine.

When the nightmare seemed to be over, the front wheels of the car got
blocked by a mudhill that Pedro couldn't circumvent. Without a word,
without saying anything, they all leaped off the car. I was going to do
the same. I opened the door. And I heard them again. I'm not sure if it
was all of them, or just one.

Get inside. Don't move.

Close the door, Pedro said from the driver's seat.

I closed the door.

Kicking down the trees, they tore them down. Thin-trunked trees, but
trees after all. I watched them from the car, they looked like
superheroes.

There they are! Shouted Mau... the ex guerrilla fighter.

Duck down, Pedro ordered me.

I embedded myself into the seat.

I look up, outside. They were all still. Looking behind. Towards the
others.

I began to turn my head, slowly, until I saw them. Pointing at us, more
spiteful than ever. Their stance was, for the first time, that of
someone who's going to shoot no matter what.

Duck down, Pedro ordered me again.

I embedded myself into the seat.

Our group started piling trunks, at extraordinary speed.

Fast and precise movements.

I turned my head again.

The others were still there. I could feel their violence, more powerful
than ever.

Duck down, begged me Pedro.

They built a ramp in a matter of seconds.

Come on, Pedro, speed up.

They lifted up the car.

It was a big, heavy car, one that five men wouldn't be able to lift in
normal conditions. But nobody had any doubt they could do it. They put
the tree trunks under the front wheels. And an abrupt jostle left us in
the starting position, once again.

They got back in the car. This time, Oriol sat on the seat next to mine.
And he hugged me.

We left.

I looked behind me for a long while.

Oriol's arms were embracing me, strongly.

They were still pointing at us. Ruthlessly.

Until, at a distance, I saw how they gave up their body stance and left.

They looked tiny.

*Silence.*

Do you realise how people will want to hit on us when we tell that
story?

Asshole. Oriol\... What a guy!

I got upset. I unwrapped myself off his arms and told him to leave me
alone.

I looked outside the window. I shed all my tears by that window.

I couldn't hear anything or anybody.

It took me a long time to cry again. Years. It took me much longer to
cry again about this. I did cry about other things. Sometimes I felt the
fear coming back, abstract, and I did cry. But as if crying about
something else.

We soon reached the first houses.

Somebody found a banknote in his pocket. It became clear then that they
hadn't been searched as thoroughly as I had been. But I couldn't care
less. We only had a few bucks and we were definitely going to spend
them.

We found a small shop, made of exposed concrete and old timber. We
stopped the car. We told them what happened to us and we were given much
more than what that old, mangled banknote was worth. It wasn't much.
Just enough. Coca-cola, beer, crisps, and cigarettes.

I sat on the veranda, lit a cigarette and took a gulp of Coca-cola.

Can't beat the feeling! I thought. And smiled listlessly.

The best Coca-cola I ever had.

The most delicious cigarette ever.

I recall being in silence, detached from their conversation. Drinking
Coca-cola and chain-smoking.

*Silence.*

I don't know how we got to the local police station.

A hut among the trees.

Two cops. A good one and another one, maybe worse.

We came to report an armed assault.

Name of the assailants.

Excuse me officer, but we didn't introduce each other.

No name, no report.

We gave some nicknames we managed to eavesdrop while they were talking
to each other. I will leave those out. As I mentioned early on, I'm
leaving them out for security reasons.

OK, that's enough. Said the cop about the nicknames. I was speechless.
Just imagine you walk into a police station and they'll require you to
name the people you want to report, you answer Micky Mouse and the
Blondie. And the cops then nod in approval. It sounds hard to believe,
but that's what happened.

OK, that's enough. Said the cop. Let's file the report.

He took out a piece of paper. It was a square sheet from a DIN-4
notebook torn out of the wire binding. Old. Worn. Stained with oil and
stuff written on it.

He wrote the names down. And we recounted the events.

The cop scribbled whatever he pleased.

I can see that desk, his chairs, their silhouettes, their postures. That
paper. That handwriting.

We finished our statement.

Come with me, the good cop commanded.

We followed him.

He walked towards an oil barrel and opened the lid. You have a car,
we've got this.

He began to show us assault rifles, machine guns and shotguns.

Shall we go and get them?

We could kill them, said the other cop, the, maybe, worst of the two.

Silence*.*

Stares.

No.

That *no* broke the silence\... I went on... If you hand them over to
me, yes. Yes... I will kill them. I'll kill them myself. I didn't say
anything. Why did I just say that? I want to go away. Into town. Right
now.

We all looked at each other.

Silence, filled with doubts.

I want to go.

More silence.

More doubts.

*Silence.*

I want to go.

And we left.

*Silence.*

Night light in the Tropic.

It wasn't difficult to get a bed from someone, in a big house. With a
barbed wire fence, a gatekeeper and his machine gun to match. Oh... and,
of course, a party was included.

I needed booze. A shower. I asked for it. And I got it from them. I also
borrowed a dress. Black. And a pair of knickers.

(I drank half a bottle of rum, on the shower floor, under the stream of
water.)

The best shower of my life. I love to reminisce about it. I can
sometimes even smell the soap I used. And, sometimes, when I remember
it, when I'm reaching the end of that memory, it feels like my hair is
wet, like my skin is fresh. And, some days, when I look at myself after
that recollection, I get the feel I'm wearing the dress I borrowed from
them.

*Silence.*

The guests didn't take long. There were many people and everybody knew
what we had been through. People were talking to me, but I couldn't hear
them.

Some women came, volunteering to listen to me about my trauma. I thanked
them all. I told them I was alright. And poured myself another drink.
All women, the locals in particular, took it for granted that I had been
raped.

They didn't do anything to me, I repeated, more than once.

And I continued to drink.

Seriously. I'd repeat. Nothing.

Drinking.

They just touched my butt. Three times.

They just held a gun against my temple. The left one.

They didn't believe me.

I resolved to isolate myself. More. In the kitchen.

There He was, bottle of tequila in hand.

Want some?

OK.

Do you know how people drink it here?

No.

May I?

Sure.

He gave me a wet kiss on the hand and poured some salt on it. I
quivered. He took a slice of lemon and he put it in my lips, gently. He
licked the salt, took a gulp of tequila straight off the bottle and,
without touching me, he snatched the lemon from my lips.

Your turn.

We drank the bottle between the two of us.

But I didn't get drunk.

*Silence.*

We locked each other in a tight embrace, on the street.

I felt his strength.

His tenderness.

*Silence*

This night will belong to us. Forever.

We had just won a battle and we were celebrating together.

Did you hear that? That noise? No? That was a gunshot. Someone must have
been killed. *Ais*, sorry, I'll stop. But... nothing. Let's move on. But
where were we? Oh yeah... He...

I woke in his arms, floating. I can still feel his smell. Baby-like.
Yes, that big-handed man, fifteen years my senior, he smelled like a
baby. The light was pouring from the window. We looked at each other, in
silence. For a long while.

*Silence.*

We're alive, I whispered in a broken voice.

*Silence.*

At breakfast, I asked Him and his brother, Álvaro, if they were feeling
sore. We were sore in every corner of our bodies, our souls, our brains.
Our eyelids too.

*Silence.*

Life, as it couldn't be otherwise, kept going on.

Oriol and I went back to the countryside.

We went back to our routine. Collecting plants. Classifying them. Making
our herbarium project come true. Distilling eucalyptus. And lemongrass.
Working in the country. Picking pipians. Going out to the small shop in
the afternoon for a beer. Having dinner with our host family. Showering
in the well. With our clothes on. Taking shit. In that outhouse. Liquid
poo. While the flies ravaged our butts.

I was having nightmares. A nightmare, a recurring one. I'd wake up
drenched in sweat. And I'd run towards the window to check they weren't
there. I dreamed that the eyes of those five guys, the others, were
staring from outside the window. With their faces covered. Their hoods.
That canary yellow clown wig. They were staring at me, pointing at me
with their machine guns and pistols. It was awful.

I tried to sleep again. But I wouldn't sleep. And despite the fear, I'd
go out of the room. I'd go to the well. And I'd walk a little bit into
the bushes. I'd grab a stone and throw it. Not too far.

And then, a galaxy of fireflies would appear before me. Always. Without
fail.

It wouldn't last long. But it was beautiful. And that moment, looking at
them, I felt alive. It was the only thing that made me feel anything at
all. Just once, every night, waking up after a nightmare, I'd go and
wake them. And when they'd fade out, I'd look up to the sky and watch
the stars. Longingly. As if I was meant to be there. In the firmament.
Dead. But I wasn't. I felt a very strong connection. With the soil and
the sky. Something very profound to a 21-year-old child.

When I went back to bed, I would shut my eyes. Sometimes I would get
closer to Oriol and cuddled him so I could sleep better. Sometimes,
sound asleep, he welcomed me in his arms. Some other times I didn't
cuddle him. I just touched him with a foot or a hand, some patch of his
skin.

More or less clutching onto him, I'd close my eyes and conjure up over
and over that moment when, after throwing that stone, the galaxy of
fireflies ignited for me. And that way I was able to sleep. Among
fireflies, among galaxies.

Silence.

One morning they came looking for us. I can't remember who that was.
Somebody came for us from the town. The robbers had heard about our
police report and they spread the voice that if they found us, they
would kill us. We had to go. We packed up the little we had left. A few
clothes. The passport. And little else.

We were taken back to town. And we were told that we would have a
meeting, the seven of us.

Us seven, we got in. Here.

There was a table with its chairs.

The seven of us exchanged greetings euphorically. A silent euphoria. We
didn't need words. We were there. Alive. Why talk about nothing.

We waited.

Until a man came in. I didn't know who he was. Well, I do know perfectly
who he was. It's all written in my diary. But now, I need to leave out
the details. I've told you a few times. Yes, still two decades after
that, I must leave that out. Leave out names, leave out job positions.
Leave out... I'm afraid, yes, afraid of... Anyways!

That man. Who had some power. He said this to us:

We made you all come here because, after the assault, the robbers, with
everything they stole from you, bought off the police in the region.
Before, their turf used to be this size. The strip of territory he
depicted between his fingers was the length of a lighter. Now, their
police impunity zone is this big. And he stretched out his arms to show
us its extent. Since there are Europeans among the victims, some... some
dipl... some mechanisms... have been activated. (*Ais*... I don't want
to get into a mess here.) Some "organs", for lack of a better word. So,
yes, certain "organs" have been activated, and we're working in
conjunction with them.

We looked at each other. It seemed like they were taking action. Maybe
those "organs", working in conjunction with them, could... anyway.

If you give us your consent, as soon as we catch them red-handed, we
will kill them.

I understood everything. I had been long enough in this tiny country to
be able to understand that wasn't as insane as it sounded. And I just
talked.

I can't decide this. I can't agree to something like this. But I
understand the situation. So I'm donating my "vote" to this country's
citizens.

We were four Europeans and three locals. With my ruling, the Sal...
those born here were going to decide. The other Europeans adhered to my
proposal.

The remaining three, the ones from here, gave us looks of gratitude.
They knew it wasn't an easy choice. Killing somebody, or giving somebody
else your consent to do it wasn't part of our plans. In our European aid
workers' plans. To them, born here, killing sometimes was a necessary
thing. And if somebody else could handle it, all the better.

And, as we knew, all three of them agreed to have those guys killed if
caught in action.

The meeting finished.

And I, this *self*, stayed here. Nailed into this chair.

Oriol and another of my *selves* couldn't go back to the country. They
were after us, Oriol and one of my *selves*, to kill them. So they left
for an island, a paradise. On that island, Oriol and another of my
*selves*, found some solace.

I'm not sure, maybe it'd be better if... what if I keep telling this
story, without changing *selves*? Without... without explaining which
*self* is the one speaking and this way we can progress with no
*sotracs*?

Shit! What do you call *sotracs*?

Wow, me, this *self* stuck to the chair. I'm not sure why it hasn't
spoken Catalan again. Because most of my *selves* happen to speak
Catalan. And like some of the things one *self* and another *self* do
permeate and affect all those *selves*, sometimes, inexplicably, some
words come out in Catalan. I don't know... *sotracs*... *sotracs*...
*sotracs*. I can't think of the right word. Anyway...

Let's make a pact, ok? I speak in the first person, singular, even
speaking about other selves. And you won't forget I am many selves and,
from now on, when I say *"*I*"* I'm referring to a different *self*.
Because I, this *self*, already told you her story. The story that came
to an end after that meeting, absurd, here, in this chair.

Let's go back to the island.

Anyway, there isn't that much to tell. An island, a hammock, cold beer,
some rest... It was much needed, actually. And then, the journey
continued. We visited other countries. We met many people. We slept
among the fleas. With mice. Our poo was still liquid. And not much else.

One day we took a flight back home.

At Menorca Airport I showed up in front of my parents and they didn't
recognise me.

I had lost weight, I was very suntanned, more than usual. But I believe
they didn't recognise me because my look, my face, my soul, had been
changed forever. I wore the imprint of a gifted life, carved into every
pore of my skin. The mark of someone who is there, but who might have
not been.

Dad.

Mum.

They said my name at the same time. And they took me in their arms. They
kissed me.

Once in the car, I told them something had happened.

July 24?

How do you know?

My dad jolted the steering wheel and stopped the car at the kerb.

Mum, how do you know?

I can't believe it. I can't believe it. I can't believe it. Repeated my
dad, ever the sceptic.

I didn't know what was happening.

My mum was sobbing. Heartbroken.

Mum?

Mum? What's going on?

She wouldn't reply, she just cried. And stared at me

My dad dropped it: that day we were sitting at the table and your mum,
suddenly, burst into tears. She said: she's not alright. Our daughter is
not alright. I couldn't reassure her. She's not alright. Our daughter's
not alright, she went on.

Fuck, mum.

Stop cursing, my mum stammered, as she stopped crying.

Fuck, mum, that's way too much!

I asked grandpa, wherever he was, to protect you.

Fuck.

That mouth...

I could feel it, mum. Fuck...

I suddenly stopped crying, she said.

Fuck... fuck... mum...

I knew that everything was over. I didn't know what, but I knew that you
were alright. That everything was over.

I told them what that "everything" was and how it had ended. They were
frightened about what could have happened.

We will never be able to understand everything.

I spent a few days in Menorca, at the house we have by the sea. I wasn't
feeling. I couldn't sleep well. My home, my place in the world, I found
it remote.

I once spat on the dining room floor. My dad told me off. I wouldn't
spit on dining room floor again. I was suddenly eating rice with my
hands. I was suddenly saying words my parents didn't understand.

Sometimes I had the feeling I had just returned from war.

Everything felt like nothing to me.

And I started gambling with fate.

Betting high.

On my first night out, I did drugs. I stole some pills with my friends.
Yes, we borrowed them, but that's a different story. I drove my car
while very high. I had never done that before (that or stealing
ecstasy). But I did it. Nothing happened. I knew nothing was going to
happen.

Nothing else can ever happen to me. That was my mantra. Nothing could
ever happen to me.

I knew it would take death a while to knock on my door again.

I went back to Barcelona. To university.

I resumed my routine and tried to forget what happened.

So naive.

Such things are not forgotten.

*Silence.*

An autumn evening, my phone rang.

It was Him.

Hi?

Hi.

He called my name, sweetly.

I called his name, sweetly. And I asked Him how he was.

They've been killed. That was his answer.

Shit. Fuck.

Yes.

We were quiet for a while. Breathing together.

Are you alright?

So so. You?

So so.

Let 's chat soon.

Ok.

Take care.

You too.

I hung up the phone. We hung up.

Silence. More silence.

Even more.

That silence still remains.

Twenty years later, I haven't managed to fill that dan silence.

Five dead.

Five victims.

Five dead on my shoulders.

Five.

Five dead, five murderers, dead.

Five dead, who will die with me.

Five mothers of five dead.

Five.

Only five. Only five mothers of five dead.

Only five.

Only five dead, on my shoulders.

And that silence.

That lingering silence, which won't go away. It won't dissolve. Twenty
years later. That "they've been killed" remains inside me. It won't go
away. I know that much. It's the price of that "yes", indirect, but
still "yes". That consent. Absurd. That "yes" which has left me nailed
to this chair.

This chair.

This silence.

Silence.

This silence is an apology. To them, to the others. To the five mothers.

That silence is my blame. And it 's heavy.

Nothing will happen to you, that kid said to me, as he hammered his gun
against my temple.

Nothing happened to me. Not to me. He was right. Nothing was going to
happen to me.

Silence\...

Did you hear that? A mango has fallen down.

Silence.

Another one.

Silence.

And another one.

Oooh... Mangoes are falling down. Many.

What a wonderful thing.

Maybe each one of us will be able to pick their own.

*The* *stage becomes filled with fireflies.*

*Silence*.

*All* *but five fireflies fade out.*

*Silence.*
